Restructure space for project proposals to take different stages into account (#159)
OpenRailAssociation/technical-committee: project-proposals/stage-2/stage-2-questionnaire.md

Reviewer: We could add a new category of questions about practices and security. Using OpenSSF? (see #153)

Author: Yes, I would suggest to do discuss this as part of issue #153 and add it in a separate pull request, if we decide to do that.

Reviewer: Should we check the quality of the `MAINTAINERS.md` file (and others) or is done during the onboarding process?
What expectation do we have for this file?

Author: It might be good to have some automatic linting which looks at the required files and establishes a base line.

Author: We will look at that separately from this pull request. Issue to be created.

Author: #163

Reviewer: Should we add something about the financing (if any)?

Author: This is a huge topic. It would be interesting information, but might be difficult to get. I'm also not sure that it should be part of the requirements in the incubation process. Financing can be quite volatile and the source code will not go away, even if financing has stopped. How to provide financing to make projects more sustainable is another aspect which is quite important, but probably also out of scope of the incubation process. Maybe this is another dimension, we should think about, but not explicitly cover in the incubation process. Financing implicitly will be included in the questions about the activity of the project.

Author: #164

Reviewer: Should we talk about maintainance level?
Is there a support level (is it funded?) ?
Does the project provide any kind of support?

> [!NOTE]
> Maybe not relevant for this stage?

Author: Availability of a commercial ecosystem of support offerings is something which I would consider relevant at stage 3, not at stage 2. It also should not be part of the project itself, but a separate layer which is clearly distinguished of what we expect from the open source project. Open source code comes without any support guarantees by definition of its licenses. I created issue #162 to track this.

Reviewer: Should we had something about documentation?
- User documentation?
- Technical documentation?

Author: This is in the area of general software quality, like other things such as tests, code quality, UX, etc. We agreed to not include that in the formal criteria of the incubation process, but focus on the meta aspects there. A project won't be able to reach a mature state where it has a broad diverse group of contributors and production users without reaching a level of software quality which is good enough.

We might want to address this question elsewhere, but for now we don't see the TC in a position to have to and be able to really evaluate it.

# Stage 2: Incubation

*As a project intending to move to stage 2 of the OpenRail incubation process, please fill out this questionnaire and send it to the Technical Committee. See the [incubation process](../../incubation-process.md) for details about criteria and requirements for new projects and how it works to get new projects into the association.*

*Copy this template and fill in your answers to the questions in the sections below.*

## Health metrics

*How to assess project health depends on the context of the concrete project. Please answer the questions below and add any additional explanations or data you see as useful to show that the project has a healthy community and development activity.*

> ### How many committers does the project have?

Reviewer: We could specify that a link to the pulse page is sufficient.

Author: I wonder if the question in this form even makes sense. The total number of committers doesn't really say anything about the current activity of the project or how many people do significant contributions. Maybe we need a better definition of what an "active contributor" is and use that as the main criterion. This could then be merged with the "How active is the project?" question.

Author: From this week's TC meeting:

We look for active contributors in the following sense:
* People who were active within the last twelve months
* People who did more than x commits (let's go with x=5 for now)

We document this in the questionnaire. When submitting the questionnaire projects only have to submit the link to the GitHub Contributors page.

> ### How many committers does the project have?

Reviewer: We could add a definition of  "commiters".

Author: Yes, I think this is needed. See [comment above](https://github.com/OpenRailAssociation/technical-committee/pull/159#discussion_r1810051754).

> ### How many different organizations are contributing to the project?

Reviewer: How the project can retrieve this information?

Author: One way would be to look at the email addresses of committers. One example of this kind of statistics is the [development statistics for the Linux kernel](https://lwn.net/Articles/972605/).

### How much is the project dependent on individual contributors?

*How high is the risk to a project should the most active people leave? This is called the [Contributor Absence Factor](https://chaoss.community/kb/metric-contributor-absence-factor/), sometimes also referred to as bus factor.*

### How active is the project?

> *Indicate activity by number of commits, number of issues closed, pull request merged, etc.*

Reviewer: Could be merged with the question "How many committers does the project have?"

Author: See [comment above](https://github.com/OpenRailAssociation/technical-committee/pull/159#discussion_r1810051754).

## Open governance

### What is the release process of the project?

> *Indicate documentation of the release process, how changes are communicated, versioning schemes, signing of release artifacts, etc.*

Reviewer: Maybe add a template or example of what is expected? (something like [this](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/appendix-07-nightly-rust.html))
List of stuff that must be included.

Author: I would suggest to handle the details of this separate from this pull request. We already have issue #144 for that. Documenting good practices for the release process or maybe even define a standard "OpenRail release process" is a bigger topic. For the questionnaire right now I would leave it with what we have right now and stay with an informal description and a pragmatic interpretation of that.

> ### How are decisions taken in the project?

Reviewer: > [!NOTE]
> Not sure about this one...

```suggestion
### How are decisions made in the project?
```

Author: I guess you are right. It's the more common phrase, especially in American English (see also https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/6431/what-is-the-difference-between-make-decision-and-take-decision).

> *Indicate documentation of the project governance.*

Reviewer: Is the `GOVERNANCE.md` file is enough?
What decision? (roadmap, merge PR, technical design...)
We should add precision for this question.

Author: I kind of like the idea that the GOVERNANCE.md file should be enough. Should we then require that in addition to the formal high-level decision making process it also includes information about how more technical decisions are taken, such as merging PRs, design, architecture, etc.? Or should this be in the CONTRIBUTING.md?

Author: Agreed in the TC meeting: We will try to put the information about the decision making in the GOVERNANCE.md file, which doesn't change often and needs a higher level of discussion and agreement to change. The CONTRIBUTING.md and possibly other files contain the more practical details, which will change much more often and don't need so much discussion. These files can point to the GOVERNANCE.md to reference the decision making process.

### What is the business roadmap of the project?

> *Indicate links to the roadmap of the project and how planning is done.*

Reviewer: - What level of details?
- Provide examples?
- What timeframe? long-term, short-term
- which part of the roadmap funded
  - For the vision (long term) features

Author: My feeling is that it will be hard to specify how the roadmap should look like in a way which works for many different projects. Maybe some good examples are enough as a reference and then it's up to the TC to ask questions of apply judgement in the context of the concrete project.

# Stage 2: Incubation

*As a project intending to move to stage 2 of the OpenRail incubation process, please fill out this questionnaire and send it to the Technical Committee. See the [incubation process](../../incubation-process.md) for details about criteria and requirements for new projects and how it works to get new projects into the association.*

*Copy this template and fill in your answers to the questions in the sections below.*

> *The document has two sections. In the first section you provide references and evidence that show that you fullfil the criteria for incubation stage 2. These will mostly be links to documentation and other sources of information which show that you fullfil the criteria. Feel free to add any additional information which helps to explain or interprete this information. The second section is a checklist the Technical Committee fills out when it evaluates the proposal.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*The document has two sections. In the first section you provide references and evidence that show that you fulfill the criteria for incubation stage 2. These will mostly be links to documentation and other sources of information which show that you fulfill the criteria. Feel free to add any additional information which helps to explain or interpret this information. The second section is a checklist the Technical Committee fills out when it evaluates the proposal.*
```
see
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/fulfill
and
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/interpret

### How many active contributors does the project have?

*An active contributor is a person who has repeatedly contributed over the last twelve months. Please provide the links to the GitHub contributors statistics (e.g., https://github.com/OpenRailAssociation/osrd/graphs/contributors) or any equivalent references.*

### How many different organizations are contributing to the project?

*This can be reported by looking at the email addresses of contributors in the commit log.*

### How much is the project dependent on individual contributors?

*How high is the risk to a project should the most active people leave? This is called the [Contributor Absence Factor](https://chaoss.community/kb/metric-contributor-absence-factor/), sometimes also referred to as bus factor.*

## Open governance

### What is the release process of the project?

*Please provide a link to a document which describes the release process. This should explain how changes are communicated, versioning schemes, signing of release artifacts, etc.*

### How are decisions made in the project?

> *Please provide a link to the GOVERNANCE.md file of the project. This should explain the decision making process, including how technical decision are made such as accepting pull requests or deciding about technical architecture. The GOVERNANCE.md file should document the decision making process, which won't change very often. The CONTRIBUTING.md and possibly other files contain the more practical details, which will need continuous adaption. These files can point to the GOVERNANCE.md to reference the decision making process.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Please provide a link to the GOVERNANCE.md file of the project. This should explain the decision making process, including how technical decisions are made such as accepting pull requests or deciding about technical architecture. The GOVERNANCE.md file should document the decision making process, which won't change very often. The CONTRIBUTING.md and possibly other files contain the more practical details, which will need continuous adaptation. These files can point to the GOVERNANCE.md to reference the decision making process.*
```

### What is the business roadmap of the project?

*Please provide a link to the roadmap of the project.*

## Adoption

### Where is the project used in production?

> *Please provide links to references of production users or add equvalent information here.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Please provide links to references of production users or add equivalent information here.*
```
